When it comes to generative AI, most of my time has been spent analyzing its patterns, detecting where it gets its knowledge and why it does not function the way a normal tool would, as it often times gets referred to as. Learning how to control and manipulate AI to your liking feels less like operating and learning how to use a hammer and more similar to leashing a rabid animal and training it to write Shakespeare. If your words are too vague, it will easily get lost and give you something completely unrelated. If you write too many sentences, are too specific, or anything in between, it will get confused and bring out an equally, if not even more convoluted answer.
In order to understand how to properly use AI to your liking, you must stick by a strict set of rules, ones that you must enforce every time on an AI to get consistent results.
For an example as such, I treated it with the rules of the aformentioned assignment: collage, surrealism, and strict in its references to Ernst and Hoch. By keeping said rules, only ever changing a single line or sentence minutely throughout each of the 3 pictures, it felt more like iterations or variations rather than entirely new pieces. Similarly to a collage, of cutting up familiar imagery and reassembling it, it felt strangely familiar.
AI does not know when an image feels “right”, it must be guided and taught, or refined with the prompt.
Refik Anadol’s data-driven installations caught my eye in terms of AI inspiration. He shows how generative systems can produce constantly changing visuals while feeling iterative, intentional, and emotional. It extends artistic vision rather tan replacing it. Control and chaos are balanced, curated and careful, in a way that works with the creativity harmoniously rather than contrastingly.
